---
title: "MECANO PhD projects"
meta_title: ""
description: ""
draft: false

---


### Citations and quotations in the Naturalis Historia: creating the canon in the Encyclopaedia

The general objective of this PhD project is to study how people are cited in Pliny the Elder's
_Naturalis Historia_, considered the first Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World. A monumental collection of 37 books, the _Naturalis Historia_ is populated by multiple people who are mentioned in very
different roles: sources, witnesses, protagonists of episodes or significant discoveries. Indices of current
critical editions represent a useful but relatively flat tool to extrapolate information about the people
mentioned: by developing a digital annotation of books 2–6, the PhD candidate will be able to provide an
informed picture of the people associated to astronomical and geographical knowledge, and the textual
strategies used by Pliny to present them. 
<!--
The specific objectives of this project are (1) to systematically
gather quantitative and qualitative information on the people mentioned in NH 2–6; (2) to detect the patterns
used by Pliny when selecting the people in relation to the topics treated & structure of the explanations, and
thus (3) to understand the mechanisms that guided the representation of sources, witnesses and protagonists
in the first attempt to systematize the broad area of “natural sciences” in western history of knowledge.
-->

### The philosophical canon and the art of (mis)quoting Plato and Aristotle in the Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca

It is widely assumed that, at least from Iamblichus (mid 3rd–mid 4th cent. AD) onwards, in the
Platonic schools of late antiquity philosophical education was organised around a canon of philosophical
texts with works by Aristotle and Plato at the core. It is unclear what role this canon played in actual school
practice and what limits it imposed on the circulation and knowledge of non-canonized Platonic and
Aristotelian works. This project’s goal is to complement the ancient Platonists’ self-understanding of their
philosophical canon with data generated by the study of citations and quotations of Plato and Aristotle in
the Greek commentaries on Aristotle (most of which were written by Platonists).
The project will combine the statistics of the texts and passages quoted in the largest philosophical corpus extant from
antiquity (Commentaria in Aristotelem graeca or CAG) with a qualitative and conceptual analysis of
selected passages.
<!-- this project has the following specific objectives: (1) to analyse the principles of inclusion
and exclusion from the philosophical canon, (2) to assess the availability and circulation of philosophical
texts in late antiquity, (3) to map the relation between the various commentators on Aristotle and their
schools in late antiquity, (4) to define the role that non-canonical works played in philosophical education,
and additionally, (5) to study these phenomena in the parts of the Greek commentary tradition that are only
extant in Arabic translations.
-->


### The Presence of Classics in Early Modern Book History

The aim of this PhD project is to study the reuse of Latin scientific and technical texts in
(Early) Modern England, contributing to RO1. The Helsinki Computational History Group has used
automated methods to detect all the instances of text reuse in the largest collections of printed data for
British books (1470–1800, > 250.000 works) available in machine-readable form: Eighteenth Century
Collections Online (ECCO) and Early English Books Online (EEBO-tcp phase II). The result is a massive
dataset of linked text-reuse fragments, which are qualified, clustered and compared. Based on this dataset,
the project will focus on the text reuse of a selected group of Latin scientific authors such as Lucretius,
Pliny the Elder, and Vitruvius, and their reception and reuse in Early modern works. 
<!--
The specific
objectives of the project are: (1) to develop a methodology to identify not only the reuse of the Latin texts,
but also of the translated versions of the texts, tackling the broader problem of multilingual text retrieval;
(2) to quantitatively assess the impact of Latin scientific tradition in the database; (3) to interpret the
gathered data and to integrate the results in the broader field of Reception Studies.
-->

### Pulse and Physiology in Hellenistic Science

Part of the medical canon taught in late antiquity and the middle ages were the Galenic pulse
works, which shaped medical theory and practice throughout history. Galen’s own works were greatly
informed by the lost canon of Hellenistic pulse treatises and theories, with which Galen engages
throughout his works and which he cites and quotes profusely. These fragments, together with fragments
in other ancient authors such as Rufus of Ephesus, allow us to uncover and reconstruct the complex and
diverse Hellenistic pulse theories. 
<!--
This project’s specific objectives are (1) to map and explain the canon of Hellenistic ideas
concerning the pulse - identify the different types of pulse and their relations to physiological causes and
pathological conditions according to key Hellenistic authors; (2) to create a comprehensive overview of
its rich and overlapping terminology; (3) to trace the filtering of these ideas and terms into Galen’s pulse
canon.
-->

### Detecting and Retrieving Lost Historians

The general objective of this PhD project is to study ancient historians whose works are lost
and preserved through quotations and paraphrases in later sources. Classical
scholarship defines them as ‘fragmentary historians’, because it is possible to find traces of their work by
extracting chunks of texts (fragments) from still extant sources. Our extant textual heritage shows that
only 5% of all Greek historians has been preserved in full and that the picture we get of ancient
historiography on this basis is very limited and uneven. Collections of fragmentary historians have been
published in a printed format, but we still miss a deep analysis of these traces within their context of
transmission. This PhD project will analyse the language used by extant authors to quote and paraphrase
authors who are now lost. 
<!--
The specific objectives of this project are (1) to discover why and how authors
who are not in the traditional canon were quoted and referred to by still extant authors; (2) to understand,
on the basis of the quotation types, the literalness and functions of quotes; (3) to contribute to the creation
of a new catalogue of lost historians based on textual evidence.
-->

### Recovering anonymous late-antique preachers in the corpus of pseudo-Augustinian sermons

When it comes to Latin patristic preaching, Saint Augustine is the canon. His ca. 750 sermons
were transmitted as sermon collections in thousands of medieval manuscripts. In the manuscripts
authenticated Augustinian sermons travel with large numbers of sermons wrongly attributed to Augustine,
ca. 150 of which have been classified as anonymous homilies that stem from Late Antiquity or even North
Africa. This
project will recover, describe and analyse the sermons of forgotten late-antique preachers, preserved
through association with Augustine, to contribute to our understanding of the dynamics of inclusion in and exclusion from the canon. 

<!--
Specific objectives of this project are: (1) to create a dataset of
annotated texts and quantitative and qualitative analyses of their manuscript manifestations; (2) to
investigate the contribution of material transmission to inclusion in or exclusion from the canon; (3) to
extrapolate a meta-reflection on the integration of the dynamics of textual transmission in our evaluation
of the canon of Late-antique Latin preaching.
-->

### Syntax, formulaic structures, and canon-marking in Greek and Arabic: documentary texts and Galen

Galen’s vast Greek corpus of medical treatises, many also translated into Arabic, offers
perfect territory for exploring language structures in the canonical writer’s toolbox. How original or
common were they? Can the impacts of such canon markers be traced in non-Galenic attestations of
contemporary and other germane language material? Galen’s works spread widely already during his time;
there is also contemporary language material in the form of documentary and (semi)literary papyri of
similar text types (e.g. prescriptive passages in recipes and instructions in medical and magical papyri;
stipulations in legal documents; dialogic, narrative, polemical or politeness mechanisms in private letters
and petitions). 
<!--
The specific objectives of this project, contributing to RO3, are: (1) to study a syntactic
feature (e.g. subordination, directives, non-finite complementation) in a select treatise or cross-section of
treatises by Galen (with surviving translations in Arabic) in comparison to the range of linguistic
possibilities used in documentary material; (2) to gauge the extent of formulaic structures in Galen’s usage
and (3) to identify markers of canonicity. An analysis of Galen’s usage within this complex Greek état de
langue equips the study with an informed basis for analysing the survival of structure/s (Bauformen) in
the Arabic translations, along with the canon marking they imply or display.
-->

### Ancient Sources on Matter in Late Medieval Commentaries on Aristotle

In the mid-13th century, just after Aristotle’s works on natural philosophy were translated,
various conceptions of matter were at play. The ancient commentaries of these works negotiated the
epistemic authority of two canonical authors, Plato and Aristotle, in their mutual relation and in relation
to interpreters from various philosophical traditions (see e.g. PhD 2). Medieval views on matter were
subject to shifts in the canon, with new authorities being added (the Arabic commentators; scholastic
commentators), and shifts in the canonical value of the different authorities (a stronger position of Aristotle
to the detriment of Plato). Further canonical shifts are linked to the incorporation of information from
source texts in other genres (manuals, compendia, doxography, polemical treatises) into the commentary
genre. Although there is a growing literature on medieval theories of matter, there is a need to analyse the
presence of ancient sources and their use by late medieval thinkers. 
<!--
The specific objectives of this PhD
project are therefore (1) to map and classify the presence of ancient authorities – Presocratics, Plato, Stoics,
Platonists, Peripatetics, Augustine – and the shifting canons in late medieval commentaries (13th–15th c.)
on Aristotle’s Metaphysics and Physics, and their relationship to theories of matter; and (2) to map shifts
in the canon in the transmission to different languages and different cultural and ideological contexts by
classifying types of citations and quotations (RO1) and linguistic and genre-related markers (RO3).
-->

### Contextual scientometrics – Uncovering and understanding referencing patterns to the ancient canon in modern scholarly discourses

In modern academia, famous authors, thinkers and philosophers from the ancient world
continue to shape scholarly discourses. However, precisely which canonical references we find in specific
disciplines, and how often they are referred to, is yet to be investigated. The specific objectives of this PhD
project are therefore to build a large, multi-disciplinary corpus of scientific journals from JSTOR. Next
we will reuse existing computational workflows from the Trismegistos project (TM) to detect ancient
canonic references in this corpus. The main analytical objective will be to analyse the extracted
references in a scientometric way, allowing us to investigate which of the canonic thinkers are quoted the
most in different disciplines and whether there are any diachronic trends to be found. Furthermore, we are
interested in co-citation networks, which will help us to understand which canonic authors are frequently
mentioned together and may be even forming canonic clusters. In addition to these more traditional
scientometric approaches, a core methodological objective is to add a distant reading perspective to the
analyses, which allows us to put the canonical references in context and better understand their usage.
With this project we develop a novel approach called ‘contextual scientometrics’. 
<!--
This project addresses
RO4 by shedding light on the influence of the ancient canons on the modern academic.
-->

### A democratic turn? Uncovering and understanding referencing patterns to Greco-Roman canonicity in 20th-Century Public Discourse

Reference cultures typically provide other cultures with models, ideas or examples, and have
been formed through public discourse over different generations (van Eijnatten 2015). This PhD project
will uncover the social use of Greco-Roman antiquity as a reference culture in 20th-century public
discourse, and takes it to a new level by setting the following specific objectives: (1) to use reference
mining (see also PhD 9) as a tool to develop a longitudinal overview, for the first time reconstructing
ancient canon formation as negotiated through journalistic writings in the long 20th century. Referencing
antiquity implies that the target audience is expected to be familiar with the reference or at least recognizes
its function (e.g. ‘Trump, modern Nero, watched the Capitol sacked from a White House dining room’).
Collecting and categorizing these references in a corpus of digitized collections (esp. Gallica) creates an
instrument by which the PhD will (2) assess existing hypotheses on canon formation and the social use of
canon33 and (3) formulate a new hypothesis on the robustness of ancient canonicity. Europe’s longstanding
relation with classicism makes it an ideal testing ground for questions on cultural change. Its
turbulent history of colonialism and war occupation will be the subject of a test case to (4) deploy the new
research tool combined with quantitative and qualitative analysis to better understand the relation between
cultural change and ancient canonicity.


